# Topiary Book

## Getting started

The Topiary Book is an [mdBook](https://rust-lang.github.io/mdBook)
book. It is rendered to HTML as part of a CI process and published to
the Topiary website when changes are merged to `main`.

For local development, mdBook is included in the Nix devshell and can be
run in `serve` mode, from this directory, which spins up a local server
and reflects the book content on the filesystem:

```console
$ cd docs/book
$ nix develop
$ mdbook serve
```

Please keep the style guide (below) in mind when making changes, to help
ensure consistency.

## Continuous integration

The CI job defined in `.github/workflows/website.yaml` creates the
static assets for the Topiary website, which includes the rendered
Topiary Book.

On success, the website is published to https://topiary.tweag.io, with
the Topiary Book at https://topiary.tweag.io/book.

## Style guide

This is not part of the Topiary Book, but exists to try to document a
consistent style for future changes. These are not intended to be
prescriptive rules, but exist as guidelines to keep the Topiary Book
better maintained.

The following are in alphabetic order:

### Capture names

The Tree-sitter query syntax `@foo` is a **"capture name"**, or
"capture" where the context makes the elision obvious.

### English

The Topiary Book is mostly written in British English, but this dialect
is not mandated; American or other dialects of English are perfectly
acceptable and can be intermixed.

### Formatting formatting queries

Formatting queries ought to be formatted in the same way as Topiary
formats them (with the `tree_sitter_query` formatting queries). As of
writing, this is Algol-style indentation, rather than Lisp-style.

(This may change; see issue #828.)

### Formatting queries

The queries used to define formatting rules should be referred to as
**"formatting queries"**. Using "rules" or "styles", etc. can confuse
what is Topiary's core mechanism.

### Inline code formatting

Use inline code formatting, with backticks, only for code and
code-adjacent text. For example, `topiary` would specifically be the
Topiary CLI binary, rather than Topiary as a concept.

### Line wrapping

The Topiary Book's markdown files are mostly wrapped to 72 columns. This
is not strictly necessary, but it aids reading in a terminal emulator.

### Nix

**"Nix"** is capitalised (unless it is referring to the binary, in which
case it's `nix`). All other Nix-related concepts should be treated as
normal words (i.e., lowercase, unless they start a sentence), unless
they are idiomatically capitalised elsewhere. For example:
**"nixpkgs"**, **"flake"**, **"devshell"**, etc.

### Notes and warnings

Notes should be marked up like so:

```markdown
> **Note**\
> Here is the note text.
```

Warnings should use mdBook's `warning` class:

```markdown
<div class="warning">

Here is the warning text.

<div>
```

> [!TIP]
> When including HTML, such as mdBook's `warning` class, ensure the
> Markdown content is interposed by blank lines. Otherwise, it will be
> treated as plain text and no Markdown rendering will be applied.

### Single and multi-line

Use **"single-line"** and **"multi-line"** (i.e., hyphenated), rather
than spaced or juxtaposed.

### Title case

The Topiary Book uses sentence case, rather than title case, for
headings.

### Tree-sitter

It's **"Tree-sitter"**, not "Tree Sitter" or "tree-sitter", etc.

### Tree-sitter grammars

The Topiary Book uses **"Tree-sitter grammar"**, rather than
"Tree-sitter parser". "Tree-sitter" can be omitted where the context
makes the elision obvious.

### Unordered lists

Use `-` as the unordered list markup, rather than `*`.
